Add loader reference to the beta docs (#9374)
withastro/docs: src/content/docs/en/reference/loader-reference.mdx

    }));
  },
});
```

### Object loaders

If a loader needs more control over the loading process it can use the object loader API. The loader is defined as an object with a `load()` method that is called at build time to fetch data and update the data store. It allows entries to be updated incrementally, or for the store to be cleared only when necessary. It can also define a schema for the entries, which can be used to validate the data and generate static types. 

The recommended pattern is to define a function that accepts configuration options and returns the loader object, in the same way that you would normally define an Astro integration or Vite plugin. 

```ts title=loader.ts

import type { Loader, LoaderContext } from 'astro/loaders';

// Define any options that the loader needs
export function myLoader(options: { url: string }): Loader {
  // Configure the loader 
  const feedUrl = new URL(options.url);
  // Return a loader object
  return {
    name: "my-loader";
    // Called when updating the collection.
    load: async (context: LoaderContext): Promise<void> => {
      // Load data and update the store
    }
    // Optionally, define the schema of an entry. 

>     // It will be overridden by user-defined schema. 

Reviewer: I might have missed it, but where would a user define a schema?

Reviewer 2: as a property of defineCollection

Reviewer: Ooh, right. The loaders are used inside the definition, not replacing it. That is what I got wrong.

    schema: async () => z.object({
      // ...
    })
  };
}
```

## Loader API

The API for [inline loaders](#inline-loaders) is very simple, and is shown above. This section shows the API for defining an object loader.

### The `Loader` object

The loader object has the following properties:

#### `name`

> **Type**: `string`

Author: Why the `<p>` tags here?

> **Type**: `string`

Author: Ahh, missed the comment above.

A unique name for the loader, used in logs and [for conditional loading](#integration-support).

#### `load`
**Type**: `(context: LoaderContext) => Promise<void>`

An async function that is called at build time to load data and update the store. See [`LoaderContext`](#loadercontext) for more information.

#### `schema`
**Type**: `ZodSchema | Promise<ZodSchema> | (() => ZodSchema | Promise<ZodSchema>)`

> An optional [Zod schema](/en/guides/defining-collections/#defining-datatypes-with-zod) that defines the shape of the entries. It is used to both validate the data, and also to generate TypeScript types for the collection. If a function is provided, it will be called at build time before `load()` to generate the schema. You can use this to dynamically generate the schema based on the configuration options or by introspecting an API. 

Reviewer: > It is used to both validate the data, and also to generate TypeScript types for the collection.
> [...]
> or by introspecting an API. 

I think it is a bit weird to have the API introspection example when stating that this is used to generate the types because an introspected schema won't be typed.

Author: It would. You can e.g. do an introspection query to an API endpoint, and then generate the schema from that. This will then in turn generate the TypeScript types from that schema.

### `LoaderContext`
This object is passed to the `load()` method of the loader, and contains the following properties:

#### `collection`

> **Type**: `string`

Reviewer 3: nit:
```suggestion

<p>

**Type**: `string`
</p>
```

The unique name of the collection. This is the key in the `collections` object in the `src/content/config.ts` file.

#### `store`

> **Type**: [`DataStore`](#datastore)

Reviewer 3: nit:
```suggestion

<p>

**Type**: [`DataStore`](#datastore)
</p>
```

A database to store the actual data. Use this to update the store with new entries. See [`DataStore`](#datastore) for more information.

#### `meta`
**Type**: `MetaStore`

> A simple KV store, designed for things like sync tokens and last-modified times. Use this to store metadata about the collection. The data is persisted between builds, but is only available inside the loader.

Reviewer: > The data is persisted between builds

It might be worth explaining where/how it is persisted. If my last modified time is persisted but the actual data that was read isn't, then it becomes a problem since the implementation won't fetch everything again.

For example, what should I configure in Turbo to store this information and the loaded entries?

Author: Good point. It is actually persisted in the data store, but a different scope so it's not available in the collection. Would something like "This metadata is persisted between builds alongside the collection data, but is only available inside the loader" work?

      const feed = loadFeed(feedUrl);
      store.clear();

      for (const item of feed.items) {
        const data = await parseData({
          id: item.guid,
          data: item,
        });
        store.set({
          id,
          data,
        });
      }
    },
  };
}
```

#### `generateDigest`
**Type**: `(data: Record<string, unknown> | string) => string`

Generates a non-cryptographic content digest. This can be used to check if the data has changed. 

```ts title=loader.ts {19,24}
import type { Loader } from "astro/loaders";
import { loadFeed } from "./feed.js";

export function feedLoader({ url }): Loader {
  const feedUrl = new URL(url);
  return {
    name: "feed-loader",
    load: async ({ store, logger, parseData, meta, generateDigest }) => {
      logger.info("Loading posts");
      const feed = loadFeed(feedUrl);
      store.clear();

      for (const item of feed.items) {
        const data = await parseData({
          id: item.guid,
          data: item,
        });

        const digest = generateDigest(data);

        store.set({
          id,
          data,
          digest,
        });
      }
    },
  };
}
```

#### `watcher`

> **Type**: `FSWatcher`

Reviewer 3: nit:
```suggestion

<p>

**Type**: `FSWatcher`
</p>
```

When running in dev mode, this is a filesystem watcher that can be used to trigger updates. See [`ViteDevServer`](https://vitejs.dev/guide/api-javascript.html#vitedevserver) for more information.

```ts title="Extract from the file() loader" {8-13}
return {
  name: 'file-loader',
  load: async ({ config, store, watcher }) => {
    const url = new URL(fileName, config.root);
    const filePath = fileURLToPath(url);
    await syncData(filePath, store);

    watcher?.on('change', async (changedPath) => {
      if (changedPath === filePath) {
        logger.info(`Reloading data from ${fileName}`);
        await syncData(filePath, store);
      }
    });
  },
};
```

> #### `refreshContextData`

Reviewer: ```suggestion

#### `refreshContextData`
```

**Type**: `Record<string, unknown>`

If the loader has been triggered by an integration, this may optionally contain extra data set by that integration. It is only set when the loader is triggered by an integration. See the [`astro:server:setup`](/en/reference/integrations-reference/#astroserversetup) hook reference for more information.

```ts title=loader.ts {5-8}
export function myLoader(options: { url: string }): Loader {
  return {
    name: "my-loader",
    load: async ({ refreshContextData, store, logger }) => {
      if(refreshContextData?.webhookBody) {
        logger.info("Webhook triggered with body");
        processWebhook(store, refreshContextData.webhookBody);
      }
      // ...
    },
  };
}
```

> ### `DataStore`

Reviewer 3: nit: Like above, it's better with a new line after a heading
```suggestion
### `DataStore`

```

> The data store is a loader's interface to the content collection data. It is a key value store, scoped to the collection, so a loader can only access the data for its own collection.

Reviewer: > scoped to the collection

Is the `meta` store not also scoped to the collection? It is not mentioned there.

#### `get`
**Type**: `(key: string) => DataEntry | undefined`

Get an entry from the store by its ID. Returns `undefined` if the entry does not exist. 

```ts
const existingEntry = store.get("my-entry");
```

The returned object has the following properties:
```ts
interface DataEntry<TData extends Record<string, unknown>> {
	/** The ID of the entry. Unique per collection. */
	id: string;
	/** The parsed entry data */
	data: TData;
	/** The file path of the content, if applicable. Relative to the site root. */
	filePath?: string;
	/** The raw body of the content, if applicable. */
	body?: string;
	/** An optional content digest, to check if the content has changed. */
	digest?: number | string;
	/** The rendered content of the entry, if applicable. */
	rendered?: RenderedContent;
}

> ```

Author: Good idea. I think it could do with some more discussion too.

#### `set`

> **Type**: `(opts: Opts) => boolean`

Reviewer 3: Nitpicking for the formatting.
Otherwise, does this property refer to [`MutableDataStore`](https://github.com/withastro/astro/blob/1c64ae304d3c008a776e98e48fd3ece8be7b1fb5/packages/astro/src/content/mutable-data-store.ts#L16C14-L16C30) because I can't find it in [`DataStore`](https://github.com/withastro/astro/blob/1c64ae304d3c008a776e98e48fd3ece8be7b1fb5/packages/astro/src/content/data-store.ts#L44). If so, I think the type should be updated to be clearer for readers:
```suggestion
<p>

**Type**: `(collectionName: string, key: string, value: unknown) => boolean`
</p>
```

Author: No, this has changed in the 5.0 branch. The `DataStore` interface is what was previous called `ScopedDataStore`. The previous `DataStore` is renamed to `ImmutableDataStore`.

See https://github.com/withastro/astro/blob/next/packages/astro/src/content/mutable-data-store.ts#L333

The main method to update the store with new entries. It takes an object with the following properties:

- `id: string`: The ID of the entry. Must be unique per collection. If the ID already exists in the store, the entry will be replaced.
- `data`: The data to store. This will be stored unchanged, so if it needs to be parsed or validated then it should be done before calling `set()`.
- `body?: string`: The raw body of the content, if applicable. This is mostly relevant for file-based loaders, or those that also store rendered content.

> - `filePath?: string`: The file path of the content, if applicable. This only applies to file-based loaders, and is used to resolve paths such as images or other assets.

Reviewer: If not provided, the images and assets are resolved relative to what? Or are they not resolved at all?

Author: Good point. They're not resolved at all.

- `digest?: string`: An optional content digest, to check if the content has changed. It is an opaque value, so you can use any method to generate it, but we recommended using the `generateDigest()` function. If provided it will be checked against the existing entry, and if it matches then the entry will not be updated and `set` will return false.
- `rendered?: { html?: string, metadata?: Record<string, unknown> }`: The rendered HTML content of the entry, if applicable. If provided, users will be able to use the `<Content />` component to render the HTML. The metadata object is used for things like frontmatter or other metadata extracted from the content.

Returns `true` if the entry was set. If `digest` was passed and matched an existing entry with the same ID, it will return `false` and not update the entry.

```ts title=loader.ts {7-14}
    for (const item of feed.items) {
      const data = await parseData({
        id: item.guid,
        data: item,
      });
      const digest = generateDigest(data);
      store.set({
        id,
        data,
        rendered: {
          html: data.description ?? "",
        },
        digest,
      });
    }
```

#### `entries`

> **Type**: `() => Array<[id: string, DataEntry]>`

Reviewer: I'm just double-checking since this seems mostly inspired by JS' `Map`. Is this an actual array, or is it an iterator yielding those tuples?

Author: It's an actual array

Get all entries in the collection as an array of key-value pairs.

#### `keys`
**Type**: `() => Array<string>`

Get all the keys of the entries in the collection.

#### `values`

> **Type**: `() => Array<DataEntry>`

Author: No, see above. You need to look at the `next` branch

> **Type**: `() => Array<DataEntry>`

Reviewer 3: Thanks for the edit (and sorry again), this one can be marked as resolved!

Get all entries in the collection as an array.

#### `delete`

> **Type**: `(key: string) => void`

Author: See above

> **Type**: `(key: string) => void`

Reviewer 3: Thanks (and sorry again), this one can be marked as resolved!

i18nReady: true
---
import Since from '~/components/Since.astro';

> Astro content collections help you organize and load data into your Astro project. This guide explains how to define a loader, and the API that loaders use to interact with the content layer.

Author: Great, thanks. I wasn't totally sure what tone to strike in this intro section.

The recommended pattern is to define a function that accepts configuration options and returns the loader object, in the same way that you would normally define an Astro integration or Vite plugin. 

```ts title=loader.ts

import type { Loader, LoaderContext } from 'astro/loaders';

// Define any options that the loader needs
export function myLoader(options: { url: string }): Loader {
  // Configure the loader 
  const feedUrl = new URL(options.url);
  // Return a loader object
  return {
    name: "my-loader";
    // Called when updating the collection.
    load: async (context: LoaderContext): Promise<void> => {
      // Load data and update the store
    }
    // Optionally, define the schema of an entry. 
    // It will be overridden by user-defined schema. 
    schema: async () => z.object({
      // ...
    })
  };
}
```

> 

Author: How about this: https://github.com/withastro/docs/pull/9374/commits/e2f9b212072d85892d1cb391fcb19ff16532157c

> 

Reviewer 4: Fantastic! :partying_face:

## Loader API

The API for [inline loaders](#inline-loaders) is very simple, and is shown above. This section shows the API for defining an object loader.

### The `Loader` object

The loader object has the following properties:

#### `name`

<p>

**Type**: `string`
</p>

A unique name for the loader, used in logs and [for conditional loading](/en/reference/integrations-reference/#refreshcontent-option).

#### `load`

<p>

**Type**: <code>(context: <a href="#loadercontext">LoaderContext</a>) => Promise&lt;void&gt;</code>
</p>

An async function that is called at build time to load data and update the store. See [`LoaderContext`](#loadercontext) for more information.

#### `schema`

> **Type**: `ZodSchema | Promise<ZodSchema> | (() => ZodSchema | Promise<ZodSchema>)`

Reviewer 3: nit (formatting):
```suggestion

<p>

**Type**: `ZodSchema | Promise<ZodSchema> | (() => ZodSchema | Promise<ZodSchema>)`
</p>
```

An optional [Zod schema](/en/guides/defining-collections/#defining-datatypes-with-zod) that defines the shape of the entries. It is used to both validate the data, and also to generate TypeScript types for the collection. If a function is provided, it will be called at build time before `load()` to generate the schema. You can use this to dynamically generate the schema based on the configuration options or by introspecting an API. 

### `LoaderContext`

> This object is passed to the `load()` method of the loader, and contains the following properties:

Reviewer 3: nit (formatting):
```suggestion

This object is passed to the `load()` method of the loader, and contains the following properties:
```

#### `collection`

<p>

**Type**: `string`
</p>

The unique name of the collection. This is the key in the `collections` object in the `src/content/config.ts` file.

#### `store`

<p>

**Type**: [`DataStore`](#datastore)
</p>

A database to store the actual data. Use this to update the store with new entries. See [`DataStore`](#datastore) for more information.

#### `meta`

<p>

**Type**: `MetaStore`
</p>

> A KV store scoped to the collection, designed for things like sync tokens and last-modified times. This metadata is persisted between builds alongside the collection data, but is only available inside the loader.

Reviewer 3: I think using the full words might make the sentence clearer for everyone:
```suggestion
A key-value store scoped to the collection, designed for things like sync tokens and last-modified times. This metadata is persisted between builds alongside the collection data, but is only available inside the loader.
```

```ts
const lastModified = meta.get("lastModified");
// ...
meta.set("lastModified", new Date().toISOString());
```

#### `logger`

<p>

**Type**: [`AstroIntegrationLogger`](/en/reference/integrations-reference/#astrointegrationlogger)
</p>

> A logger that can be used to log messages to the console. It is recommended to use this instead of `console.log` to ensure that logs are displayed correctly in the Astro UI. It will include the loader name in the log message. See [`AstroIntegrationLogger`](/en/reference/integrations-reference/#astrointegrationlogger) for more information.

Author: Yeah, I'm not entirely sure what I was getting at there!

```ts title=loader.ts {5-8}
export function myLoader(options: { url: string }): Loader {
  return {
    name: "my-loader",
    load: async ({ refreshContextData, store, logger }) => {
      if(refreshContextData?.webhookBody) {
        logger.info("Webhook triggered with body");
        processWebhook(store, refreshContextData.webhookBody);
      }
      // ...
    },
  };
}
```

### `DataStore`

The data store is a loader's interface to the content collection data. It is a key value store, scoped to the collection, so a loader can only access the data for its own collection.

#### `get`

<p>

**Type**: <code>(key: string) => <a href="#dataentry">DataEntry</a> | undefined</code>
</p>

Get an entry from the store by its ID. Returns `undefined` if the entry does not exist. 

```ts
const existingEntry = store.get("my-entry");
```

The returned object is a [`DataEntry`](#dataentry) object.

#### `set`

<p>

**Type**: <code>(entry: <a href="#dataentry">DataEntry</a>) => boolean</code>
</p>

> Adds an entry to the store, returning `true` if the entry was set. If `digest` was passed and matched an existing entry with the same ID, it will return `false` and not update the entry. See [`DataEntry`](#dataentry) for more information on the fields to pass. The entry should have been parsed using `parseData` before being stored. As well as applying any validations and transforms in the schema, this will also ensure that any images are correctly processed.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Used after data has been [validated and parsed](#parseData) to add an entry to the store, returning `true` if the entry was set. This returns `false` when the [`digest`](#digest) property determines that an entry has not changed and should not be updated.
```
First paragraph: I feel like that was maybe a lot here? Does this adequately convey what's needed for *this* property with the link? Because we do mention that the `digest` property will search for matching entries, and I think that's adequately covered there?

Second paragraph: I always get nervous when I see "backwards documentation" :sweat_smile: (Oh, and you should have done this first....) I think this is important enough to put it right in the description!

```ts title=loader.ts {7-14}
    for (const item of feed.items) {
      const data = await parseData({
        id: item.guid,
        data: item,
      });
      const digest = generateDigest(data);
      store.set({
        id,
        data,
        rendered: {
          html: data.description ?? "",
        },
        digest,
      });
    }
```

#### `entries`

<p>

**Type**: `() => Array<[id: string, DataEntry]>`
</p>

Get all entries in the collection as an array of key-value pairs.

#### `keys`

> **Type**: `() => Array<string>`

Reviewer 3: nit (formatting):
```suggestion

<p>

**Type**: `() => Array<string>`
</p>
```

Get all the keys of the entries in the collection.

#### `values`

<p>

**Type**: `() => Array<DataEntry>`
</p>

Get all entries in the collection as an array.

#### `delete`

<p>

**Type**: `(key: string) => void`
</p>

Delete an entry from the store by its ID.

#### `clear`

<p>

**Type**: `() => void`
</p>

Clear all entries from the collection.

#### `has`

<p>

**Type**: `(key: string) => boolean`
</p>

Check if an entry exists in the store by its ID.

### `DataEntry`

This is the type of the object that is stored in the data store. It has the following properties:

#### `id`

<p>

**Type**: `string`
</p>

An identifier for the entry, which must be unique within the collection. This is used to look up the entry in the store, and is the key used with `getEntry` for that collection. 

#### `data`

<p>

**Type**: `Record<string, unknown>`
</p>

> The actual data for the entry. When a user accesses the collection, this will have TypeScript types generated according to the collection schema. It the responsibility of the loader to use [`parseData`](#parsedata) to validate and parse the data before storing it in the data store: no validation is done when getting or setting the data.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The actual data for the entry. When a user accesses the collection, this will have TypeScript types generated according to the collection schema.

It the loader's responsibility to use [`parseData`](#parsedata) to validate and parse the data before storing it in the data store: no validation is done when getting or setting the data.
```
Just separating paragraphs!

#### `filePath`

<p>

**Type**: `string | undefined`
</p>

> A path to the file that is the source of this entry, relative to the root of the site. This only applies to file-based loaders, and is used to resolve paths such as images or other assets. If not set, then any fields in the schema that use [the `image()` helper](/en/guides/images/#images-in-content-collections) will be treated as [public paths](/en/guides/images/#where-to-store-images) and not transformed.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A path to the file that is the source of this entry, relative to the root of the site. This only applies to file-based loaders, and is used to resolve paths such as images or other assets.

If not set, then any fields in the schema that use [the `image()` helper](/en/guides/images/#images-in-content-collections) will be treated as [public paths](/en/guides/images/#where-to-store-images) and not transformed.
```
Just breaking up paragraphs!

#### `body`

<p>

**Type**: `string | undefined`
</p>

The raw body of the entry, if applicable. If the entry includes [rendered content](#rendered), then this field can be used to store the raw source. This is optional, and is not used internally.

#### `digest`

<p>

**Type**: `string | undefined`
</p>

> An optional content digest for the entry. This can be used to check if the data has changed. If the digest is passed when setting an entry, it will only update the entry if the digest does not match the existing entry. The format of the digest is up to the loader, but it should be a string that changes when the data changes. The [`generateDigest`](#generatedigest) function can be used for this.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
An optional content digest for the entry. This can be used to check if the data has changed.

When [setting an entry](#set), the entry will only update if the digest does not match an existing entry with the same ID.

The format of the digest is up to the loader, but it must be a string that changes when the data changes. This can be done with the [`generateDigest`](#generatedigest) function.
```
Alright, does this pair well with our `set` entry?

Author: Looks good. Do you think it needs to call out the fact that it only does the conditional insert if the digest is provided. If it's unset, it will always update the entry and return true.

Reviewer 4: I don't *think* we need to call that out? The field is optional, and it can't match if it's not provided in the first place? Let's go understated to start, then we'll find out if people are confused and need the call out!

#### `rendered`

<p>

**Type**: `RenderedContent | undefined`
</p>

> If the entry has been rendered to HTML, this field can be used to store an object with the rendered content and metadata. This can be used to store the rendered content of a markdown entry, for example, or HTML from a CMS. This field is optional, but if provided then the user can use [the `render()` function and `<Content />` component](/en/guides/working-with-collections/#rendering-body-content) to render the entry in a page.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Stores an object with an entry's rendered content and metadata if it has been rendered to HTML. For example, this can be used to store the rendered content of a Markdown entry or HTML from a CMS.

If this field is provided, then [the `render()` function and `<Content />` component](/en/guides/working-with-collections/#rendering-body-content) are available to render the entry in a page.
```
